# Coral-ecological-memory-from-heatwaves
Data and code for Brown et al. 'Marine heatwaves modulate the genotypic and physiological responses of reef-building corals to subsequent heat stress'


Abstract


Back-to-back marine heatwaves in 2016 and 2017 resulted in severe coral bleaching and mortality across the Great Barrier Reef (GBR). Encouragingly, some corals that survived these events exhibit increased bleaching resistance and may represent thermally tolerant populations that can better cope with ocean warming. Using the GBR as a natural laboratory, we investigated whether a history of minimal (Heron Island) or severe (Lizard Island) coral bleaching in 2016 and 2017 equates to stress tolerance in a successive heatwave (2020). We examined the genetic diversity, physiological performance, and trophic plasticity of juvenile (<10 cm) and adult (>25 cm) corals of two common genera (Pocillopora, Stylophora). Despite enduring greater cumulative heat stress (6.3°C wk-1 vs. 5.6°C wk-1), corals that experienced the third marine heatwave in five years (Lizard) exhibited twice as high survival and visual bleaching thresholds compared to corals that had not experienced significant bleaching in >10 years (Heron). Surprisingly, only one shared host–Symbiodiniaceae association was uncovered between locations (Stylophora pistillata–Cladocopium ‘C8 group’) and there was no genetic overlap in Pocillopora–Cladocopium partnerships, suggesting turnover in species composition from recent marine heatwaves. Corals within the species complex Pocillopora that survived the 2016 and 2017 marine heatwaves at Lizard were the most resilient, exhibiting three times greater calcification rates than conspecifics at Heron. Further, surviving corals (Lizard) had distinct isotopic niches, lower host carbon and greater host protein, while conspecifics that had not experienced recent bleaching (Heron) had two times greater symbiont carbon content, suggesting divergent trophic strategies (i.e., greater reliance on heterotrophy vs. symbiont autotrophy, respectively) that influenced survival. Ultimately, while corals may experience less bleaching and survive repeated thermal stress events, species-specific trade-offs do occur, leaving open many questions related to the long-term health and recovery of coral reef ecosystems in the face of intensifying marine heatwaves. 
